---
title: Combiner function for hybrid key encapsulation mechanisms (Hybrid KEMs)
abbrev: KEM Combiner
docname: draft-ounsworth-cfrg-kem-combiners-03

# <!-- stand_alone: true -->
ipr: trust200902
area: Security
stream: IRTF
wg: CFRG
kw: Internet-Draft
cat: info
venue:
  group: "Crypto Forum Research Group (CFRG)"
  type: "Research Group"
  mail: "cfrg@ietf.org"
  arch: "https://mailarchive.ietf.org/arch/browse/cfrg/"
  repo: "https://github.com/EntrustCorporation/draft-ounsworth-cfrg-kem-combiners"

coding: utf-8
pi:    # can use array (if all yes) or hash here
  toc: yes
  sortrefs:   # defaults to yes
  symrefs: yes

author:
    -
      ins: M. Ounsworth
      name: Mike Ounsworth
      org: Entrust Limited
      abbrev: Entrust
      street: 2500 Solandt Road – Suite 100
      city: Ottawa, Ontario
      country: Canada
      code: K2K 3G5
      email: mike.ounsworth@entrust.com
    -
      ins: A. Wussler
      name: Aron Wussler
      org: Proton AG
      abbrev: Proton
      country: Switzerland
      email: aron@wussler.it
    -
      ins: S. Kousidis
      name: Stavros Kousidis
      org: BSI
      country: Germany
      email: stavros.kousidis@bsi.bund.de


normative:
  RFC2119:

# <!-- EDNOTE: full syntax for this defined here: https://github.com/cabo/kramdown-rfc2629 -->

informative:
  RFC8174:
  RFC8411:
  RFC8784:
  RFC8696:
  RFC8784:
  I-D.ietf-lamps-cmp-updates:
  I-D.driscoll-pqt-hybrid-terminology:
  I-D.ietf-tls-hybrid-design:
  I-D.ietf-ipsecme-ikev2-multiple-ke:
  I-D.ounsworth-pq-composite-kem:
  I-D.wussler-openpgp-pqc:
  PQCAPI:
    title: "PQC - API notes"
    target: https://csrc.nist.gov/CSRC/media/Projects/Post-Quantum-Cryptography/documents/example-files/api-notes.pdf
    author:
      - name: NIST Post-Quantum Cryptography Project
    date: November 2022
  SP800-56A:
    target: https://doi.org/10.6028/NIST.SP.800-56Ar3
    title: Recommendation for Pair-Wise Key-Establishment Schemes Using Discrete Logarithm Cryptography
    author:
      -
        ins: E. Barker
        name: Elaine Barker
      -
        ins: L. Chen
        name: Lily Chen
      -
        ins: A. Roginsky
        name: Allen Roginsky
      -
        ins: A. Vassilev
        name: Apostol Vassilev
      -
        ins: R. Davis
        name: Richard Davis
    date: April 2018
    seriesinfo:
      NIST Special Publication 800-56A
  SP800-56C:
    target: https://doi.org/10.6028/NIST.SP.800-56Cr2
    title: Recommendation for Key-Derivation Methods in Key-Establishment Schemes
    author:
      -
        ins: E. Barker
        name: Elaine Barker
      -
        ins: L. Chen
        name: Lily Chen
      -
        ins: R. Davis
        name: Richard Davis
    date: August 2020
    seriesinfo:
      NIST Special Publication 800-56C
  SP800-185:
    target: https://doi.org/10.6028/NIST.SP.800-185
    title: "SHA-3 Derived Functions: cSHAKE, KMAC, TupleHash, and ParallelHash"
    author:
      -
        ins: J. Kelsey
        name: John Kelsey
      -
        ins: S. Chan
        name: Shu-jen Chan
      -
        ins: R. Perln
        name: Ray Perln
    date: 2016
    seriesinfo:
      NIST Special Publication 800-185
  FIPS202:
    target: https://doi.org/10.6028/NIST.FIPS.202
    title: "SHA-3 Standard: Permutation-Based Hash and Extendable-Output Functions"
    date: 2015
    seriesinfo:
      Federal information Processing Standards Publication (FIPS) 202
  BDPA08:
    target: "https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-540-78967-3_11"
    title: On the Indifferentiability of the Sponge Construction
    author:
      -
        ins: G. Bertoni
        name: Guido Bertoni
      -
        ins: J. Daemen
        name: Joan Daemen
      -
        ins: M. Peters
        name: Michael Peters
      -
        ins: G. Assche
        name: Gilles van Assche
    date: 2008
  GHP18:
    target: https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-76578-5_7
    title: KEM Combiners
    date: 2018
    author:
      -
        ins: F. Giacon
        name: Federico Giacon
      -
        ins: F. Heuer
        name: Felix Heuer
      -
        ins: B. Poettering
        name: Bertram Poettering
  ETSI-QHKE:
    target: https://www.etsi.org/deliver/etsi_ts/103700_103799/103744/01.01.01_60/ts_103744v010101p.pdf
    title: Quantum-safe Hybrid Key Exchanges
    date: 2020-12
    seriesinfo:
      ETSI TS 103 744 V1.1.1
  ADKPRY22:
    title: "Practical (Post-Quantum) Key Combiners from One-Wayness and Applications to TLS."
    target: "https://eprint.iacr.org/2022/065"
    author:
      -
        ins: N. Aviram
        name: Nimrod Aviram
      -
        ins: B. Dowling
        name: Benjamin Dowling
      -
        ins: I. Komargodski
        name: Ilan Komargodski
      -
        ins: K.G. Paterson
        name: Kenneth G Paterson
      -
        ins: E. Ronen
        name: Eyal Ronen
      -
        ins: E. Yogev
        name: Eylon Yogev

--- abstract

The migration to post-quantum cryptography often calls for performing multiple key encapsulations in parallel and then combining their outputs to derive a single shared secret.

This document defines a comprehensible and easy to implement Keccak-based KEM combiner to join an arbitrary number of key shares, that is compatible with NIST SP 800-56Cr2 [SP800-56C] when viewed as a key derivation function. The combiners defined here are practical split-key PRFs and are CCA-secure as long as at least one of the ingredient KEMs is.


<!-- End of Abstract -->

--- middle


# Terminology {#sec-terminology}
The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT", "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "NOT RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this document are to be interpreted as described in BCP 14 {{RFC2119}}  {{RFC8174}} when, and only when, they appear in all capitals, as shown here.

This document is consistent with all terminology defined in {{I-D.driscoll-pqt-hybrid-terminology}}.

## Key Encapsulation Mechanisms {#sec-kem-defn}

For the purposes of this document, we consider a Key Encapsulation Mechanism (KEM) to be any asymmetric cryptographic scheme comprised of algorithms satisfying the following interfaces [PQCAPI].

~~~
def kemKeyGen() -> (pk, sk)
def kemEncaps(pk) -> (ct, ss)
def kemDecaps(ct, sk) -> ss
~~~

where `pk` is public key, `sk` is secret key, `ct` is the ciphertext representing an encapsulated key, and `ss` is the shared secret.

KEMs are typically used in cases where two parties, hereby referred to as the "encapsulater" and the "decapsulater", wish to establish a shared secret via public key cryptography, where the decapsulater has an asymmetric key pair and has previously shared the public key with the encapsulater.


# Introduction {#sec-intro}

The need for a KEM combiner function arises in three different contexts within IETF security protocols:

1. KEM / PSK hybrids where the output of a KEM is combined with a static pre-shared key.
1. Post-quantum / traditional hybrid KEMs where output of a post-quantum KEM is combined with the output of a classical key transport or key exchange algorithm.
1. KEM-based authenticated key exchanges (AKEs) where the output of two or more KEMs performed in different directions are combined.

This document normalizes a mechanism for combining the output of two or more KEMs.

## KEM/PSK hybrids

As a post-quantum stop-gap, several IETF protocols have added extensions to allow for mixing a pre-shared key (PSK) into an (EC)DH based key exchange. Examples include CMS [RFC8696] and IKEv2 [RFC8784].

## PQ/Traditional hybrid KEMs

A post-quantum / traditional hybrid key encapsulation mechanism (hybrid KEM) as defined in {{I-D.driscoll-pqt-hybrid-terminology}} as

 PQ/T Hybrid Key Encapsulation Mechanism:

: A Key Encapsulation Mechanism (KEM) made up of two or more component KEM algorithms where at least one is a post-quantum algorithm and at least one is a traditional algorithm.

Building a PQ/T hybrid KEM requires a secure function which combines the output of both component KEMs to form a single output. Several IETF protocols are adding PQ/T hybrid KEM mechanisms as part of their overall post-quantum migration strategies, examples include TLS 1.3 [I-D.ietf-tls-hybrid-design], IKEv2 [I-D.ietf-ipsecme-ikev2-multiple-ke], X.509; PKIX; CMS [I-D.ounsworth-pq-composite-kem], OpenPGP [I-D.wussler-openpgp-pqc], JOSE / COSE (CITE once Orie's drafts are up).

The traditional algorithm may in fact be a key transport or key agreement scheme, but since simple transformations exist to turn both of those schemes into KEMs, this document assumes that all cryptograhpic algorithms satisfy the KEM interface described in {{sec-kem-defn}}.

## KEM-based AKE

The need for a KEM-based authenticated key establishment arises, for example, when two communicating parties each have long-term KEM keys (for example in X.509 certificates), and wish to involve both KEM keys in deriving a mutually-authenticated shared secret. In particular this will arise for any protocol that needs to provide post-quantum replacements for static-static (Elliptic Curve) Diffie-Hellman mechanisms. Examples include a KEM replacement for CMP's DHBasedMac {{I-D.ietf-lamps-cmp-updates}}.


# KEM Combiner construction {#sec-kem-combiner}

<!-- TODO: read and cite the ETSI doc "Quantum-safe Hybrid Key Exchanges"
https://www.etsi.org/deliver/etsi_ts/103700_103799/103744/01.01.01_60/ts_103744v010101p.pdf

TODO: as per https://www.enisa.europa.eu/publications/post-quantum-cryptography-integration-study section 4.2, might need to specify behaviour in light of KEMs with a non-zero failure probability.
-->


A KEM combiner is a function that takes in two or more shared secrets `ss_i` and returns a combined shared secret `ss`.

~~~
ss = kemCombiner(ss_1, ss_2, ..., ss_n)
~~~

This document assumes that shared secrets are the output of a KEM, but without loss of generality they MAY also be any other source of cryptographic key material, such as pre-shared keys (PSKs), with PQ/PSK being a quantum-safe migration strategy being made available by some protocols, see for example IKEv2 in [RFC8784].

In general it is desirable to use a split-key PRF as a KEM combiner, meaning that the combiner has the properties of a PRF when keyed by any of its single inputs.
The following simple yet generic construction can be used in all IETF protocols that need to combine the output of two or more KEMs:

~~~
ss = KDF(counter || k_1 || ... || k_n || fixedInfo, outputBits)
~~~
{: #tab-kemCombiner title="general KEM combiner construction" }

where:

- `KDF` represents a suitable choice of a cryptographic key derivation function,
- `k_i` represent the constant-length input keys and is discussed in {{sec-k_i-construction}},
- `fixedInfo` is some protocol-specific KDF binding,
- `counter` parameter is instantiation-specific and is discussed in {{sec-instantiation}}.
- `outputBits` determines the length of the output keying material,
- `||` represents concatenation.

In {{sec-instantiation}} several possible practical instantiations are listed that are in compliance with NIST SP-800 56Cr2 {{SP800-56C}}.
The shared secret `ss` MAY be used directly as a symmetric key, for example as a MAC key or as a Key Encryption Key (KEK).

The values `k_i` can be processed individually, without requiring to store intermediate values except for the hash state and the protocol binding information required for `fixedInfo`.

## Length encoding
All variable length string inputs `s` MUST be suffixed with the length, right-encoded using the `rlen` function, having the following construction:

~~~
Validity Conditions: 0 <= len(s) < 2^{2040}
1. Let x = len(s)
1. Let n be the smallest positive integer for which 2^{8n} > x
2. Let x_1, x_2, ..., x_n be the base-256 encoding of x satisfying:
    x = sum 28(n-i)x i, for i = 1 to n
3. Let O_i = uint8(x_i), for i = 1 to n
4. Let O_{n+1} = uint8(n)
5. rlen(s) = O_1 || O_2 || ... || O_n || O_{n+1}
~~~

This is compatible with the `right_encode` construction presented in {{SP800-185}}, and encodes the length of the string `s` as a byte string in a way that can be unambiguously parsed from the end.

Right encoding is preferred to left encoding, since it provides the same security guarantees but allows
encoding ciphertext where length is a priori unknown.

## k_i construction {#sec-k_i-construction}

Following the guidance of Giacon et al. [GHP18], we wish for a KEM combiner that is CCA-secure as long as at least one of the ingredient KEMs is. In order to protect against chosen ciphertext attacks, it is necessary to include both the shared secret `ss_i` and its corresponding ciphertext `ct_i`.
If both the secret share `ss_i` and the ciphertext `ct_i` are constant length, then `k_i` MAY be constructed concatenating the two values:

~~~
k_i = ct_i || ss_i
~~~

If `ss_i` or `ct_i` are not guaranteed to have constant length, it is REQUIRED to append the `rlen` encoded length when concatenating, prior to inclusion in the overall construction described in {{tab-kemCombiner}}:

~~~
k_i = ct_i || rlen(ct_i) || ss_i || rlen(ss_i)
~~~

Any protocols making use of this construction MUST either right-encode the length of all inputs `ss_i` and `ct_i`, or justify that any inputs will always be fixed length.
In the case of a PSK the associated ciphertext is the empty string.

Including the ciphertext guarantees that the combined kem is IND-CCA2 secure as long as one of the ingredient KEMs is, as stated by [GHP18].

The ciphertext precedes the secret share, as memory-constrained devices can write `c_i` into the hash state and no further caching is required when streaming.


## Note on the order of parameters

For a two-KEM instantiation, the construction is

```
KDF(counter || ct_1 || rlen(ct_1) || ss_1 || rlen(ss_1) || 
               ct_2 || rlen(ct_2) || ss_2 || rlen(ss_2) || 
               fixedInfo, outputBits)
```

The order of parameters is chosen intentionally to facilitate streaming implementations
on devices that lack sufficient memory to hold the entirety of `ct_1` or `ct_2`. 

This construction aims to have two streaming-friendly properties. First, 
`ct_i` can be written to `KDF`'s update interface as it is received and 
does not need to be stored, finally adding its corresponding `ss_i` once 
it is available. And second, the first KEM can be processed in its entirety and
written to `KDF`'s update interface before beginning to process the second KEM.

## Protocol binding
The `fixedInfo` parameter is a fixed-format string containing some context-specific information.
This serves to prevent cross-context attacks by making this key derivation unique to its protocol context.

The `fixedInfo` string MUST have a definite structure depending on the protocol where all parts strictly defined by the protocol specification.

~~~
fixedInfo = fixedInfo || s
~~~

Each fixed-length input string `f` MAY be directly used as input:

~~~
s = f ; f is guaranteed to have fixed length
~~~

Each variable-length input string `v` MUST be suffixed with a right-encoding of the length:

~~~
s = v || rlen(v) ; v may have variable length
~~~

`fixedInfo` MUST NOT include the shared secrets and ciphertexts, as they are already represented in the KDF input.

The parameter fixedInfo MAY contain any of the following information:

* Public information about the communication parties, such as their identifiers.
* The public keys or certificates contributed by each party to the key-agreement transaction.
* Other public information shared between communication parties before or during the transaction, such as nonces.
* An indication of the protocol or application employing the key-derivation method.
* Protocol-related information, such as a label or session identifier.
* An indication of the key-agreement scheme and/or key-derivation method used.
* An indication of the domain parameters associated with the asymmetric key pairs employed for key establishment.
* An indication of other parameter or primitive choices.
* An indication of how the derived keying material should be parsed, including an indication of which algorithm(s) will use the (parsed) keying material.

This is a non-comprehensive list, further information can be found in paragraph 5.8.2 of NIST SP800-56Ar3 {{SP800-56A}}.


# Practical instantiations {#sec-instantiation}

The KDF must be instantiated with cryptographically-secure choices for `KDF`. The following are RECOMMENDED Keccak-based instatiations, but other choices MAY be made for example to allow for future cryptographic agility. A protocol using a different instantiation MUST justify that it will behave as a split-key PRF, as required in {{GHP18}}.

Each instance defines a function to be used as `KDF`, a `hashSize` to determine parameter size, and optionally a `counter`:

1. `KDF = KMAC128`, with `hashSize = 128 bit`.
1. `KDF = KMAC256`, with `hashSize = 256 bit`.
1. `KDF = SHA3-256`, with `hashSize = 256 bit`.
1. `KDF = SHA3-512`, with `hashSize = 512 bit`.

As justified in the security considerations, we recommend only Keccak-based instantiations because assuming there are no weaknesses found in the Keccak permutation, it behaves as a split-key PRF that can be keyed by any input `k_i`.
SHAKE is also not included in the list as it is not allowed by {{SP800-56A}} section 7, and does not provide any implementation advantage over KMAC.

KMAC constructions are RECOMMENDED over SHA-3, as KMAC offers a simple cSHAKE-based construction, with the advantage of returning an unrelated output when requesting a different `outputBits` KEK length.

## KMAC based construction
Options 1 and 2 are KMAC-based, as specified in NIST SP 800-185 {{SP800-185}}.
To instantiate the function:

* The context `S` MUST be the utf-8 string "KDF".
* The key `K` MUST be a context-specific string of at least `hashSize` bits, and it MAY be used as an additional option to perform context separation, in scenarios where `fixedInfo` is not sufficient.
* The parameter `counter` MUST be the fixed value `0x00000001`.

To derive a shared secret `ss` of desired length, KMAC is called a single time with the input string `X` defined in {{sec-kem-combiner}} and length `L` being `outputBits`.
This is compatible with the one-step KDF definition given in NIST SP800-56Cr2 {{SP800-56C}}, Section 4.

## Hash-and-counter based construction
Options 3 and 4 instantiate the KDF using SHA3, specified in NIST FIPS 202 {{FIPS202}}.
To generate an `outputBits` long secret share `ss`:

* the `counter` MUST be initialized with the value `0x00000001`.
* The hash is performed over the string defined in {{sec-kem-combiner}}, and repeated `ceil(outputBits/hashSize)` times. For each iteration the `counter` MUST be increased by `0x01`.
* The strings are concatenated ordered by `counter`.
* The leftmost `outputBits` are returned as `ss`.

An implementation MUST NOT overflow and reuse the `counter` and an error MUST be returned when producing more than 2^32 consecutive hashes.

# IANA Considerations {#sec-iana}

None.

# Security Considerations

The proposed instantiations in {{sec-instantiation}} are practical split-key PRFs since this specification limits to the use of Keccak-based constructions. The sponge construction was proven to be indifferentiable from a random oracle {{BDPA08}}.
More precisely, for a given capacity `c` the indifferentiability proof shows that assuming there are no weaknesses found in the Keccak permutation, an attacker has to make an expected number of `2^(c/2)` calls to the permutation to tell Keccak from a random oracle.
For a random oracle, a difference in only a single bit gives an unrelated, uniformly random output.
Hence, to be able to distinguish a key `k`, derived from shared keys `k_i` from a random bit string, an adversary has to correctly guess all key shares `k_i` entirely.

The proposed construction in {{sec-kem-combiner}} with the instantiations in
{{sec-instantiation}} preserves IND-CCA2 of any of its ingredient KEMs, i.e.
the newly formed combined KEM is IND-CCA2 secure as long as at least one of the
ingredient KEMs is. Indeed, the above stated indifferentiability from a random
oracle qualifies Keccak as a split-key pseudorandom function as defined in
{{GHP18}}. That is, Keccak behaves like a random function if at least one input
shared secret `ss_i` is picked uniformly at random. Our construction can thus
be seen as an instantiation of the IND-CCA2 preserving Example 3 in Figure 1 of
{{GHP18}}, up to some reordering of input shared secrets `ss_i` and ciphertexts
`ct_i` and their potential compression `H(ss_i || ct_i)` by a cryptographic
hash function.

<!-- Start of Appendices -->
--- back

# Acknowledgements
{:numbered="false"}

This document incorporates contributions and comments from a large group of experts. The authors would especially like to acknowledge the expertise and tireless dedication of the following people, who attended many long meetings and generated millions of bytes of electronic mail and VOIP traffic over the past years in pursuit of this document:

Douglas Stebila, Nimrod Aviram, and Andreas Huelsing.

We are grateful to all, including any contributors who may have
been inadvertently omitted from this list.

This document borrows text from similar documents, including those referenced below. Thanks go to the authors of those
   documents.  "Copying always makes things easier and less error prone" - [RFC8411].

<!-- End of Contributors section -->
